<span class="drop">S</span>oon after lawmakers approved the 2009 bill on basic education, another bill,  <span class="yellow"><a href="http://www.k12.wa.us/safs/INS/2776/2776%20Final%20Bill%20Report.pdf">SHB 2776,</a></span> also passed. Its goal was to reform the state’s old funding formulas, which weren’t keeping up with the actual costs of running schools. To do that, lawmakers introduced something called the prototypical school model. Don’t be intimidated by the name, it’s just another funding formula designed to be much simpler than how the state had handed out money in the past.

Under the prototypical school model, lawmakers decide how much money to send school districts based on factors like how many students they have, how old the students are, their family incomes and how many students have special needs. The goal is to provide a baseline for what it takes to operate a school.

An elementary school, for example, is assumed to have 400 students. If a district has 800 elementary-school students, the district will receive funding for double what they would get for 400 students. According to the prototypical school model, this elementary school of 400 students would receive funding for 1.25 principals or administrators; two-thirds of a full-time librarian or media specialist; and two office-support and non-instructional aides. The state would also provide funding for enough teachers to keep class sizes to roughly 20-25 students, depending on the grade and the number of students from low-income families.

There are similar formulas for middle and high schools.

Why did the state use this model? On a practical level, the state wanted to update the formulas so districts would get enough money to cover their actual costs for basic needs, like heat and busing. But another important reason was to increase transparency. The idea was to make it clear what the Legislature was funding, and then citizens could see whether their districts were spending state money that way. If not, they could ask questions. 

<div class="top"><a href="#top"><i class="fa fa-caret-up"></i> Back to top</a></div>